Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson.
Gene Wolff's popular science fiction series, The Book of the New Son, was published between
1980 and 1982.
The series consists of four novels, The Shadow of the Torturer, The Claw of the Consiliator,
The Sword of the Lictor, and The Citadel of the Autark.
All four books concern a character named Severian, who belongs to a torturer's guild in the
far future of Earth.
Though each volume is a complete novel, they should be read in order, since Severian's
character develops and changes as the narrative progresses.
Severian starts off as a forbidding character, dressed in a black robe and hood.
He works as a torturer, but his profession also includes acting as an executioner.
Accordingly, he carries a huge sword for chopping off heads.
We asked Wolff if there was any impetus behind the four novels of The Book of the New Son.
Well, there are a number of things that go together.
Things come together to create a book or to create the idea in the loose sense for a book.
In this case, I'm not sure that I can name anything terribly dramatic.
One of the things that happened was that I was at a science fiction convention, and
I attended a panel on costuming for the science fiction masquerade.
As I listened to the various expert costumers talk about how they did it and so forth, it occurred to me that nobody had ever done one of my characters as far as I knew.
Of course, I started to soak about that.
Then I thought of what the characters looked like.
It occurred to me that one reason that no one had done it was that I did not have very many characters who wore dramatic and interesting clothes.
While I was sitting there in the panel, I kind of designed Severian's outfit for him.
With very few changes, it went into the book in that form.
The cloak, trousers, boots, bare chest, the mask, and so forth.
A part of it was just the idea sparked by the panel that trying to achieve a dramatic visual effect.
It seems strange to have a torturer as the main character of a science fiction novel.
A figure after all that doesn't fit the normal heroic pattern.
What I wanted to do was to take someone who was not obviously a hero.
We have done an awful lot of writing about people who are clearly heroes in the popular mind.
Private detectives, fighter pilots, and whatnot.
I wanted to take someone who was a villain in the popular mind and use him as my hero, as my central character.
Obviously, a torturer and executioner, which Severian as well as a torturer at various parts of the book, is such a character.
He was the one that I fastened on.
But Severian also seems to be a decent person.
I think that's precisely true.
If he had been a thoroughgoing villain, then there would have been no real purpose as far as I'm concerned in dealing with him in the book.
What I wanted to show was that a person could find himself in some such situation and yet be fundamentally a decent man.
More next time with Gene Wolfe.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lange.
Gene Wolfe's book of the new Sun series is a highly literate and complex work.
Wolfe, for example, likes to include allusions to famous works of literature, and he often uses the traditional literary device of the tale within a tale.
This happens when he suspends his narrative about Severian the torturer and tells another sort of story altogether, usually a tale with a clear moral point to it.
We ask Wolfe why he used this technique so often.
And also sort of divide the book, separate the first half from the second half when it seems desirable to do that.
I did that in the Claw of the Consiliator, for example, in which the tale of the student in the sun comes right at the center of the book.
And it's also in sort of the Lictor where the tale of the boy called Frog is in the middle of the book and essentially is splitting the half.
And you can also use it to reveal character sometimes, as I did, for example, in the first book where I had the various people in the hospital each tell a story.
This is very, very old literary technique.
It goes back to the Middle Ages, at least perhaps beyond that for all I know.
You can use it to foreshadow things.
You can also use it to show parts of the society that would not otherwise be seen as I tried to give a glimpse of Foila's life on the Pampas in the story, in the fourth book, The Cemetery of the Artarch.
Volume one of the four volumes series, The Shadow of the Torturer, introduces a character named Baldander, who is literally a giant with immense physical powers.
We wondered if there were any models behind Baldander's.
In the book of Imaginary Beings by George Louis Bore, who describes a monster called Baldander, who was a shape changer as the tritons and proteas and so forth, were supposed to be.
And I thought it was a good name for a character who continued to grow indefinitely, which is what Baldander does.
In the third volume, The Sword of the Lictor, Severian and Baldander's fight, Severian uses his sword in the Giant Baldander's a club.
This sort of fight is reminiscent of narratives of the Middle Ages in which a knight battles an evil giant.
The image that I wanted, the jacket and the giant killer image, with the castle and the tower and so forth.
Wolf also refers to other science fiction and fantasy writers.
We found echoes of Jack Vance, for instance, in the book of the New Sun series, particularly to Vance's classic, The Dying Earth.
I owe a great deal to Jack Vance. I'm not about to deny it. I love The Dying Earth. I read it. I don't know how many times. Probably four or five times, sincerely.
And, yeah, it's in many ways the same type of story.
Moros Jean Wolf, next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is The Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Gene Wolfe's Science Fiction series, The Book of the New Sun, consists of four novels,
set in what appears to be the far future of Earth.
In order, the four novels are the Shadow of the Torturer, the Claw of the Consiliator,
the Sword of the Lictor, and the Citadel of the Autarch.
The overriding notion of the four volumes is the concept of the New Sun, a future time
of salvation when the Earth will be cleansed in a new start made.
This almost seems to be a religious concept.
We ask Wolfe if the Book of the New Sun was indeed a religious work.
The way this impart a religious work, it certainly isn't wholly a religious work.
What I tried to do in the book was touch upon the things that I thought were important
to mankind.
One of the important things is saving the Earth, which is something that we have only
in this century have realized that it needed saving, but we now realize that it does.
And in the Earth as it is, it's very apparent that it does.
If something isn't done, something positive, not just the kind of thing that we have where
perhaps we could save it if we would refrain from poisoning the sea and killing the whale,
but if something positive is done, the planet is going to freeze.
Another important element in human life is religion.
And so I tried to touch on that.
I also tried to touch on the family, on raising children and whatnot at various places in the book.
Wolfe says it took him five years to finish the four volumes in the series.
After an effort like that, we asked him what he could do for an encore.
Well, I'm not sure that I'm going to be called upon for an encore.
I am trying to do the coda, and I have another novel in the work, a completely unrelated novel.
I'm not sure that there will be people who will say that the book of the new sun is the best thing I've ever done.
There are people who say that peace is the best thing I've ever done, and there are people who say that the fifth head of service is the best thing I've ever done.
I just try and do each book as well as I can.
Wolfe is working on a fifth volume which will describe what happens to Severian, the protagonist of the first four volumes.
We wondered if that fifth volume would be a simple background work, rather than the full-length narrative.
Well, I think that if you want to reduce any story, any work to the lowest common denominator, you can do that.
I assume that you could take warranties and do it as a soap opera or a romance novel or something.
But I don't think that that's necessarily the best way to do it.
I think that a novel should be written in a way that is compatible to its subject matter.
And I was writing about a very old society with a very complicated history.
I won't say that the society is complex.
I don't think it's as complex as ours now, but its history is much more complex than ours.
And I tried to do that in a way and with the tone that I thought was appropriate to the setting.
We'll continue our conversation with Gene Wolfe on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane.
Gene Wolfe has been publishing highly regarded science fiction for a number of years,
but his best known work is the recent four volume series, The Book of the New Son.
When we spoke with Wolfe recently, we asked him if he had been a serious science fiction fan as a young reader.
I wasn't a fan in the sense of being a member of fandom, but when I was growing up, fandom was very, very small.
I graduated from high school in 1949.
I was reading, I read the first paperback science fiction anthology that was ever printed.
It was my introduction to science fiction.
I read the old science fiction pulp magazines like Starling Stories,
Berlin Wunderstories, until they went out of existence.
So I was an early reader of science fiction, yeah.
But I never went to a science fiction convention until the World Con in St. Louis, which I think was 1960.
He explains how he started to write science fiction.
Really, I was looking for a way to make some money on the side over and above my salary.
I had written for College Magazine while I was at Texas A&M,
and it occurred to me that I might be able to write some material and sell it and bring in a little extreme income.
My wife and I were living in a two room furnished apartment at the time.
We'd just been married. We neither of us had any money.
And we had to have enough money to make a down payment on furniture before we could get out of it.
Writing did not turn out to be the source of quick money that I hoped it would at the time,
but I guess I caught the bug and I've kept up with it.
Wolfe has a degree in mechanical engineering.
With that sort of background, you might have expected him to write hard science fiction, full of technology and gadgets.
But he doesn't. His science fiction is psychologically oriented and highly literary in style. We asked him why.
I don't know except anything I would say would be speculation.
Perhaps because I deal with it daily.
I'm anxious to get away from it for a while when I'm at the typewriter.
That's about the only thing I can get.
You have to remember now that when I'm writing the book of the new sun or whatever,
I've been spending the previous day writing articles about hydraulic systems or welding machines or something along those lines.
And now for plant engineering, I'm doing a series of three articles on industrial robots, for example.
And although I certainly have nothing against robots or welding machines or hydraulics,
you don't want to live and breathe any one thing all the time, or at least I don't think that I did.
Wolfe's book of the new sun, the four volume series about Severi and the Torturer, took him five years to complete.
We wondered if writing was a great strain on him since he doesn't do it full time.
Yeah, it's difficult, but if you're a tennis player, I think it's difficult to play good tennis.
I'm not a tennis player, goodness.
But you may nevertheless enjoy playing tennis, particularly if you do it well,
or at least you're able to convince yourself that you do it well.
And I enjoy writing. It's hard, it's hard work.
It's not hard work compared to digging a big hole in hard ground on a hot day,
but it's hard work in the sense that we normally talk about hard work, which is perhaps a little childish of it.
But still it's something that I like to do.
As for paying a price, you know, what would I be doing with that time?
If I were not writing, watching reruns of Mesh on TV or something of the sort,
and I really don't find that sort of thing all that rewarding.
More next time with Gene Wolfe.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
The Science Fiction author Gene Wolfe is probably best known for his fascinating four-volume series, The Book of the New Sun.
He also writes fine short stories in novellas.
Two collections of his shorter fiction have been published so far,
The Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories and Other Stories, and Gene Wolfe's Book of Days.
There are some interesting facts surrounding one of his shorter pieces,
The Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories.
It's about a boy named Taki, who's reading a science fiction story entitled, The Island of Doctor Death.
He becomes so enthralled by the story, and his own existence is so unattractive to him,
that the characters in the narrative leave the story and become part of his real life.
One of the interesting facts concerning the story is that it's written in the very rare second-person point of view.
We asked Wolfe why he wrote it that way.
I think largely as an experiment, I wanted to see if it could be done.
I needed a very distinct way of setting off the material in the book, The Island of Doctor Death,
which is the book that the boy Taki is reading in the story, from Taki's own story.
And that was the strongest way of contrasting the two elements that I could come up with.
I needed the very strong contrast in order to get the shock effect when the characters from the book that Taki was reading
actually appeared in his own life, Captain Ransom and Doctor Death himself and so forth.
One of the themes of the story is the difference between fantasy and reality.
We asked Wolfe if he meant for the reader to choose one or the other.
No, what I was trying to say, I think, was that the kind of literature that people tend perhaps to criticize children for having and reading
is actually healthier and more straightforward in most cases than the world in which the children are actually living.
So I took this The Island with the monster race, the ancient monster race and the mad scientist and so forth,
and contrasted that with Taki's actual life experience with his mother and the mother's boyfriend and the party and so forth.
Another interesting fact about The Island of Doctor Death and other stories is the two stories that Wolfe wrote soon afterwards.
One is entitled The Death of Doctor Island and the other is called The Doctor of Death Island.
We asked Wolfe why he wrote these other two.
I get the mixed up myself. The Death of Doctor Island was simply that I was talking to Joe Hensley and The Island of Doctor Death and other stories had lost,
pardon me, The Island of Doctor Death and other stories, had lost the nebula and it had lost to no award.
So I started to see on the history and the history of science fiction writers of America to lose that award, to no award.
Joe Hensley said, you should write one called The Death of Doctor Island and that would win now for sure.
And he said that this is a joke of course. And I thought, well, he thinks I can't do it and I thought I can do it.
So I started thinking about what kind of a story would go with that title, who Doctor Island might be and what the Death of Doctor Island might be and so forth.
And came up with that story.
And then why did he go on to write The Doctor of Death Island?
Well, I wanted to see if I could do it again. People kept coming up to me and giving me various switches on that title because the business with the titles got a number of people fancied.
And so I thought, well, I'll try it again and see if I can do it a third time. And I could. But it was sufficiently difficult that I didn't get terribly interested in trying to do it a fourth time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.